DEVELOPING EFFECTIVE LEARNING OUTCOMES A Practical Guide PREPARED BY Dr. Klodiana Kolomitro & Dr. Katrina Gee An Outcomes-­‐Based Education Model In recent years there has been a paradigm shift from focusing on the body of information and what is intended from the instructor, to what students have learned and can demonstrate at the end of a learning experience. Several educators have advocated for this “learner-­‐centered approach” (McCombs & Whistler, 1997; Weimer, 2002; Pillay, 2002), arguing that “what and whether students learn successfully is more important than when and how they learn something” (Spady, 1994, p. 8). The principal question asked of the student or the graduate will therefore no longer be: “what did you do to obtain your degree?” but rather “what can you do now that you have obtained your degree?”(Purses, Council of Europe, 2003) With the implementation of the new Quality Assurance Framework Ontario Council of Academic Vice-­‐Presidents’ Quality Assurance Framework (2010), Ontario universities adopted a learner-­‐ centered, outcomes-­‐based educational model. The quality assurance framework aims to “demystify the knowledge, skills, and competencies to be acquired through the chosen educational program” (Lennon, 2010, p. 7), add transparency in communicating students’ accomplishments, and create pathways to increase the mobility of students within education systems and institutions, nationally and internationally. In 2011, Queen’s University Quality Assurance Processes (QUQAPs), processes by which academic programs are approved and reviewed, was approved by Senate. The goal is to ensure that Queen’s existing and new undergraduate, graduate and professional programs continue to offer students learning experiences that are transformational, inspiring, and intellectually challenging. What are Learning Outcomes? There is no clear agreement in the literature as to the specific difference between terms such as learning outcomes, objectives, and goals. Given the lack of clarity and utility of these distinctions, from now on we will only refer to the term Learning outcomes are direct learning outcomes in this document. There are multiple definitions of statements that describe the learning outcomes but they are all fairly similar. Hounsell and Anderson knowledge, skills, and habits of (2008) use the phrase “ways of thinking and practicing” or what others mind that students are expected refer to as “habits of mind” to describe the depth and breadth of to reliably demonstrate after a knowledge and subject-­‐specific skills, and know-­‐how that students come learning experience. away with from an educational experience. According to the authors, this concept encompasses the three types of apprenticeship described by Shulman: A cognitive apprenticeship wherein one learns to think like a professional, a practical apprenticeship where one learns to perform like a professional, and a moral apprenticeship where one learns to think and act in a responsible and ethical manner that integrates across all three domains. (Shulman, 2005, p. 3) 2 Example: Undergraduate and graduate degree level expectations Provincial DLEs Essential, enduring and integrated disciplinary learning of academic program Program Learning Outcomes Application of knowledge Students will be able to integrate concepts, methods, and perspeccves from mulcple disciplines and apply those to complex environmental issues Course-­‐speci<ic knowledge, skills. and habits of mind Course Learning Outcomes Adapted from Kenny & Desmarais. (2012) A guide to developing and assessing learning outcomes Employ systems concepts and interdisciplinary perspeccves to explain principles of environmental sustainability Learning outcomes can be articulated at several levels, including lesson, course, program, institution, and province. Course learning outcomes are usually formed as explicit and concise statements that describe course-­‐specific knowledge, skills, and habits of mind a student will be able to demonstrate as a result of their experience in the course. At the program level, courses should be organized to form an integrated and coherent curriculum based on the intended course learning outcomes. Collectively, course learning outcomes are represented and embedded in program learning outcomes. Each academic program defines its uniqueness and the essential, enduring, and integrated disciplinary learning that should be demonstrated, through program learning outcomes. Program learning outcomes help students articulate the type of learning they will collectively be able to demonstrate from learning experiences in a particular program. Program learning outcomes are linked to institutional goals and Degree Level Expectations. Each academic program must articulate how the program of study addresses each of the Degree Level Expectations. The Undergraduate and Graduate Degree Level Expectations specify the following six areas of ability required at the undergraduate and graduate levels: 3 Depth and breadth of knowledge Knowledge of methodologies (UDLE)/Research and Scholarship (DLE) Application of knowledge Communication skills Autonomy and professional capacity Awareness of limits of knowledge Source: Council of Ontario Universities, Quality Assurance Framework (2010). For more information on this, please refer to Appendix A. Benefits and Potential Issues with Learning Outcomes There are several advantages to having course learning outcomes as identified by Jenkins and Unwin (2001): § § § § § § § § help instructors more precisely to tell students what is expected of them; help students learn more effectively. They know where they stand and the curriculum is made more open to them; make it clear what students can hope to gain from following a particular course or lecture; help instructors to design their materials more effectively by acting as a template for them; help instructors select the appropriate teaching strategy, for example lecture, seminar, student self-­‐paced, or laboratory class. It obviously makes sense to match the intended outcome to the teaching strategy; help instructors more precisely to tell their colleagues what a particular activity is designed to achieve; assist in setting examinations based on the materials delivered; ensure that appropriate assessment strategies are employed. At the program and institutional level, learning outcomes increase transparency, credibility and comparability of quality assurance standards. Learning outcomes simplify credit transfer and facilitate student mobility by identifying various progression routes through and between different education systems, particularly in the context of lifelong learning (Adam, 2004). Concerns that learning outcomes are too prescriptive are mitigated by ensuring that outcomes are written “with a focus on higher-­‐order thinking and application skills” (Kennedy, Hyland, & Ryan, 2006, p. 27). In fact, it is still possible and interpretations. Qualities and transferable skills necessary for further study, employment, community involvement and other activities requiring: a) the exercise of personal responsibility and decision-­‐making; b) working effectively with others; c) the ability to identify and address their own learning needs in changing circumstances and to select an appropriate program of further study; and d) behaviour consistent with academic integrity and social responsibility. techniques of analysis, both within and outside the discipline; d) where appropriate use this knowledge in the creative process; and The ability to use a range of established techniques to: a) initiate and undertake critical evaluation of arguments, assumptions, abstract concepts and information; b) propose solutions; c) frame appropriate questions for the purpose of solving a problem; d) solve a problem or create a new work; and e) to make critical use of scholarly reviews and primary sources The ability to communicate information, arguments, and analyses accurately and reliably, orally and in writing to a range of audiences. An understanding of the limits to their own knowledge and ability, and an appreciation of the uncertainty, ambiguity and limits to knowledge and how this might influence analyses and interpretations Qualities and transferable skills necessary for further study, employment, community involvement and other activities requiring: a) the exercise of initiative, personal responsibility and accountability in both personal and group contexts; b) working effectively with others; c) decision-­‐making in complex contexts; d) the ability to manage their own learning in changing circumstances, both within and outside the discipline and to select an appropriate program of further study; e) and behaviour consistent with academic integrity and social responsibility. Source: Council of Ontario Universities, Quality Assurance Framework (2010) Graduate Degree Level Expectations Master’s degree This degree is awarded to students who have demonstrated the following: 1. Depth and breadth of knowledge A systematic understanding of knowledge, including, where appropriate, relevant knowledge outside the field and/or discipline, and a critical awareness of current problems and/or new insights, much of which is at, or informed by, the forefront of their academic discipline, field of study, or area of professional practice. A conceptual understanding and methodological competence that: a) Enables a working comprehension of how established techniques of research and inquiry are used to create and interpret knowledge in the discipline; b) Enables a critical evaluation of current research and advanced research and scholarship in the discipline or area of professional competence; and c) Enables a treatment of complex issues and judgments based on established principles and techniques; and, On the basis of that competence, has shown at least one of the following: a) The development and support of a sustained argument in written form; or 2. Research and scholarship 13 Doctoral degree This degree extends the skills associated with the Master’s degree and is awarded to students who have demonstrated the following: A thorough understanding of a substantial body of knowledge that is at the forefront of their academic discipline or area of professional practice including, where appropriate, relevant knowledge outside the field and/or discipline. a) The ability to conceptualize, design, and implement research for the generation of new knowledge, applications, or understanding at the forefront of the discipline, and to adjust the research design or methodology in the light of unforeseen problems; b) The ability to make informed judgments on complex issues in specialist fields, sometimes requiring new methods; and c) The ability to produce original research, or other advanced scholarship, of a quality to satisfy peer review, and to merit publication. 3. Level of application of knowledge 4. Professional capacity/autonomy 5. Level of communications skills 6. Awareness of limits of knowledge b) Originality in the application of knowledge Competence in the research process by applying an existing body of knowledge in the critical analysis of a new question or of a specific problem or issue in a new setting. a) The qualities and transferable skills necessary for employment requiring: i) The exercise of initiative and of personal responsibility and accountability; and ii) Decision-­‐making in complex situations; b) The intellectual independence required for continuing professional development; c) The ethical behavior consistent with academic integrity and the use of appropriate guidelines and procedures for responsible conduct of research; and d) The ability to appreciate the broader implications of applying knowledge to particular contexts The ability to communicate ideas, issues and conclusions clearly. The capacity to: a) Undertake pure and/or applied research at an advanced level; and b) Contribute to the development of academic or professional skills, techniques, tools, practices, ideas, theories, approaches, and/or materials. a) The qualities and transferable skills necessary for employment requiring the exercise of personal responsibility and largely autonomous initiative in complex situations; b) The intellectual independence to be academically and professionally engaged and current; c) The ethical behavior consistent with academic integrity and the use of appropriate guidelines and procedures for responsible conduct of research; and d) The ability to evaluate the broader implications of applying knowledge to particular contexts. The ability to communicate complex and/or ambiguous ideas, issues and conclusions clearly and effectively. Cognizance of the complexity of knowledge An appreciation of the limitations of one’s own work and of the potential contributions of other and discipline, of the complexity of knowledge, and interpretations, methods, and disciplines. of the potential contributions of other interpretations, methods, and disciplines. Source: Council of Ontario Universities, Quality Assurance Framework (2010) 14