Executive Summary Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) remains one of the most important tasks of corporate leadership teams. The increased pace and magnitude of technology innovation, regulatory changes, and investor activism, combined with global uncertainty driven by geopolitical events, sovereign debt concerns, natural catastrophes and slowing growth in key market economies have increased the need for leadership engagement on risk, particularly around strategic risks that could impact long term growth. Pressure remains on corporate boards and executive teams to enhance their ERM activities and improve the linkage between performance and accountability. Rating agencies have also placed increased attention and importance on proactive ERM programs. Our ERM program continues to seek a healthy balance between risk and opportunity, ensuring increased risk is balanced with appropriate reward, while also improving and optimizing our processes. With this in mind, the Risk Committee made two primary program enhancements during the past year:  Streamlined communication to the Board of Directors. Given the significant transformation underway, Enterprise risks and mitigating actions have been a regular topic for Board meetings, thereby allowing the Committee to trim formal Board risk updates to twice per year; one during the annual strategy meeting and a second mid-year report (Exhibit 1). Exhibit 1- Streamlined communication to the Board of Directors ©2016  Upgraded annual Enterprise Risk Survey. In order to focus on issues of greatest importance to the entire company, we revised and reduced the size of the Enterprise Risk Universe from 50 to 31 risks. Additionally, given the pending separation of Adient, we increased the participation in the survey by including members of the broader Global Management Team (~top 200 leaders). The company continues to make a conscious effort to increase the interaction among the corporate and business unit functions that regularly address and manage risk. Though the Enterprise Risk Management program is run independently from Financial Risk Management, Legal and Compliance, Risk and Insurance, and Enterprise Security - they are all critical pillars in Johnson Controls Total Risk Management Process. All five activities continue to actively communicate and share risk data. The Enterprise Security team for example has introduced additional crisis management tools and processes that were instrumental in addressing some of the recent business continuity challenges. The 24-7-365 Global Security Operations Center is a good example, providing global event-related command & control and support throughout an event’s lifecycle. Total Risk Management at Johnson Controls We continue to place more attention on increasing the communication and coordination among the various corporate functions that assess and manage risk across the enterprise. As highlighted in Exhibit 2 there are five key pillars in our Total Risk Management Program. Each pillar provides a unique focus and set of resources in addressing discrete portions of the total risk environment. The Enterprise Risk Committee serves as the oversight body for this Total Risk Management approach - ensuring increased accountability and communication with the Board and the applicable Board Committees. The Committee uses the Committee forum to discuss key risks and their potential impact on corporation and the cross function structure to identify and respond to emerging risks. A brief overview of the activities of the other four risk pillars follows. Exhibit 2 – Johnson Controls Total Risk Management Approach ©2016 Financial Risk Management Internal Audit The mission of Internal Audit at Johnson Controls is to provide independent and objective assurance on the control environment, reported financial information and advisory services designed to improve the Company’s operations. Each year, the Internal Audit department undertakes a comprehensive exercise known as the ‘Audit Risk Assessment’ (“Assessment”) to focus audit activities on the risks that matter most to the enterprise and to optimize the use of audit resources. The Assessment is designed to identify key business risks across the enterprise and serves as a foundational element to align the Internal Audit function with business activities. More specifically, the Assessment:  Provides insight on the significant risks at the Company and links them to the relevant business processes;  Efficiently captures insight on risk across the enterprise using a combination of web-enabled surveys, interviews and additional data points such as prior audit results and investigations;  Helps the department to define opportunities for audit engagements and special projects; and  Allows Internal Audit to identify relevant risks in the Company’s Audit Risk Universe.  Through the scope of audits and special projects, Internal Audit documents the relevant risks and works with each Business Unit, including Corporate, to focus on areas requiring further risk management or mitigation attention. Specific benefits and outcomes of this process include the following: – Proactive identification and understanding of key business risks; – Enhanced understanding of expectations from the Audit Committee and Executive Management, and a clearer communication of the audit plan; and – Recommendations to improve the current risk management activities. The VP of Internal Audit and the VP of Corporate Strategy meet regularly to discuss risk and risk management activities across the enterprise. Their increased communication is meant to ensure risk oversight and management coverage. ERM program findings and activities are considered in building the current year’s Audit Plan. Financial accounting and reporting The finance and reporting functions at Johnson Controls operate under a “large centralized regional business center” (RBC) model, which process a significant portion of the Company’s transactional finance activities through three global RBCs (Bratislava, Dalian and Monterrey). This structure minimizes errors through process standardization, segregation of duties and robust internal controls, and provides exceptional finance talent for other parts of the business. Centralization brings efficiency but it also brings its own unique risks. With such a large volume of critical activity flowing through a limited number of sites, business continuity and contingency planning becomes critical. Formal business continuity plans for each RBC have been developed, ©2016 with live drills performed periodically in order to assess its performance and adequacy. The ultimate goal is to seamlessly continue workflow from another RBC or offsite location in the event of a business interruption. Treasury and liquidity The mission of Treasury is to deliver, ERM program. Summary The Board of Directors and the senior leadership team have embraced the importance of a robust corporate risk management program. The tone at the top has been clearly communicated and the corporation continues to develop a culture of prudent risk management. The creation of additional tools and the formation of a Risk Committee have greatly increased our ability to identify emerging risks and improve the communication frequency and fidelity between corporate leadership and the Board of Directors. The Total Risk Management approach overseen by the Enterprise Risk Committee is being viewed as a best-in-class approach to enterprise risk management. The increased dialog and coordination across multiple functions has served to significantly improve our risk management effectiveness. The separation of the Business Unit and Enterprise Risk identification processes has allowed for a more focused effort and targeted mitigation activity in the BUs. In short, the right people are focused on addressing the right risks. Despite this good ©2016 progress, we remain committed to our culture of continuous improvement. We will continue to search for new best-in-class approaches and better tools and processes to proactively identify, address and manage the risks that pose the greatest threat to Johnson Controls. ©2016