Generative AI in Medicine Divya Shanmugam1 , Monica Agrawal2,3 , Rajiv Movva1 , Irene Y. Chen4,5 , Marzyeh Ghassemi6 , Maia Jacobs7,8 , and Emma Pierson1,9 1 Department of Computer Science, Cornell Tech, New York, United States, 10044 Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, United States, 27705 3 Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham, United States, 27708 4 Department of Computational Precision Health, UC Berkeley and UCSF, Berkeley, United States, 94709 5 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science / Berkeley AI Research, Berkeley, United States, 94709 6 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science/Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, United States, 02139 7 Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, United States, 60208 8 Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University, Evanston, United States, 60208 9 Department of Population Health Sciences, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, United States, 10044. Email: emma.pierson@cornell.edu arXiv:2412.10337v2 [cs.LG] 17 Dec 2024 2 Keywords generative AI, medicine, healthcare, large language models Abstract The increased capabilities of generative AI have dramatically expanded its possible use cases in medicine. We provide a comprehensive overview of generative AI use cases for clinicians, patients, clinical trial organizers, researchers, and trainees. We then discuss the many challenges – including maintaining privacy and security, improving transparency and interpretability, upholding equity, and rigorously evaluating models – which must be overcome to realize this potential, and the open research directions they give rise to. 1 1. Introduction Excitement about the promise of generative AI in medicine has inspired an explosion of new applications. Generative models have the potential to change how care is delivered (1–5), the roles and responsibilities of care providers (6, 7), and the communication pathways between patients and providers (8, 9). Further upstream, generative models have shown promise in improving scientific discovery in medicine (through both clinical trials (10, 11) and observational research (12, 13)) and facilitating medical education (8, 14). These developments are a direct result of technical advances in generative AI, which have drastically increased the ability to generate realistic language and images, and raise important questions about how to integrate generative models into medicine. Generative AI is the latest in a series of technical advances that have driven major shifts in medicine. Past significant advances include the adoption of electronic health records (EHRs); the integration of robotics into telesurgeries (15); and the incorporation of predictive models and continuous monitoring as foundational infrastructure for new diagnostic tools (16, 17). But the introduction of new technologies into health settings inevitably introduces new challenges to overcome. For instance, the introduction of EHRs led to increases in data privacy concerns and data security breaches (18, 19). And while the introduction of EHRs has led to significant reductions in medical errors and improvements in medical guideline adherence overall (20), they have also introduced other types of errors (21). Similarly, continuous monitoring devices in healthcare settings have resulted in pervasive alert fatigue (22). Overall, the integration of technologies into medicine requires an iterative design process which addresses pitfalls and amplifies benefits (23). So, too, with generative AI. As generative models become a leading area of research and deployment in medicine, we provide a comprehensive review of the new applications they enable and the new challenges they create, with a particular focus on how users could interact with generative models. We first provide a brief overview of generative AI, detailing salient types of generative AI and how they fit into the broader landscape of machine learning in medicine. We next discuss the myriad use cases for generative AI in medicine, organized by potential users: clinicians (§2.1), patients (§2.2), trial organizers (§2.3), researchers (§2.4), and trainees (§2.5). We then highlight the challenges (§3) that must be addressed to realize this potential and safely deploy generative models (including ensuring informed consent, protecting privacy, and improving transparency, among many other considerations) and discuss future directions for research throughout. 1.1. Background on Generative AI Generative modeling is a fundamental AI paradigm which stands in contrast to predictive modeling (also called discriminative modeling): predictive models are given an input and seek to predict its label but do not attempt to model the input, whereas generative models do seek to model the input. For example, while a predictive model might be given a clinical note (the input) and try to predict whether the note indicates the presence of cancer (the label), a generative model would aim to model the distribution of clinical note text itself. The fact that generative models are trained to model the entire data distribution affords them the powerful ability to generate new data: for example, to write new clinical notes. The basic generative modeling paradigm far predates the current surge of interest in generative AI. For example, classical generative modeling methods such as Markov chains have been used to model sequences of words for decades (24), and in theory could be used 2 Shanmugam et al. to write clinical notes. In practice, however, classical generative modeling methods do not generate sufficiently realistic content to be useful, especially on complex medical data. The current surge of interest is fueled by a drastic increase in generative modeling capabilities, which has been driven by scaling models to larger deep learning architectures and larger datasets (25). These improvements have, as we describe, expanded the number of useful applications of generative AI models, and have spurred interest in applying these models to domains outside of core machine learning (26). We summarize three categories of generative models organized by the type of data on which the model operates: (1) text, (2) images, or (3) text and images. For each category, we focus on the state-of-the-art models that are currently in use. While we limit our discussion to text and image data since these are most relevant to the use cases we subsequently discuss, generative models for other types of data (for example, physiological signals and molecular graphs) are an emerging area of clinical AI research (27–29). For more comprehensive overviews, we refer the reader to (30). For modeling text, large language models (LLMs) are the dominant approach, with substantial performance gains in recent years. LLMs commonly use the transformer neural network architecture (31) to perform next word prediction: given a sequence of words, what is the most likely word that will come next? That is, for a context sequence x1 , · · · , xn , an LLM is trained to predict p(xn+1 | x1 , · · · , xn ) (32). What makes an LLM “large” is the size of its deep learning architecture, and the amount of data and compute used to train it; most language models in use today are considered LLMs. Training an LLM usually consists of three phases: first, the LLM is pre-trained on a large corpus of text scraped from the Internet; second, it is fine-tuned on instruction-following examples, wherein user questions or instructions like “Convert this discharge report into layperson’s terms” are followed by reasonable responses; third, the LLM is tailored with human feedback, where humans choose which of two possible responses they prefer to capture fine-grained preferences (33). Each of these phases can be tailored more specifically to medicine: some models are pre-trained on