Open Access Publishing: A Study of UC Berkeley Faculty Views and Practices Chan Li, Becky Miller, and Mohamed Hamed University of California Berkeley, USA Abstract This paper focuses on University of California Berkeley (Berkeley) faculty’s perception and behavior around Open Access (OA) publishing. The study considered faculty answers to specific questions related to OA from the Ithaka Faculty Survey, conducted at Berkeley in October 2018, and related them to the faculty’s scholarly output in the Scopus database. Findings from the Faculty Survey show that 71% of Berkeley faculty compared to 64% of faculty nationwide support a transition to OA publishing, which shows strong support for OA at Berkeley. However, when selecting a specific journal to publish in, faculty indicated that a journal having no cost to publish was more important than having no cost to read. After joining faculty’s survey responses and their publication output (extracted from Scopus), the data sample included 4,413 articles published by 479 Berkeley faculty between the years 2016 to 2019. With considerable disciplinary differences, the OA publication output for this sample, combining all four types of OA (Green, Gold, Hybrid, and Bronze) using data from Unpaywall, represents 72% of the total publication output. Gold OA articles, which account for 18% of all of the publications, are the focus of our study to compare against faculty’s responses in the survey. Overall, the study found that there is a positive correlation between publishing Gold OA and the faculty’s support for OA (no cost to read). In contrast, the correlation between publishing Gold OA and the faculty’s concern about publishing cost is weak. Publishing costs concerned faculty in all subject areas, whether or not their articles reported research funding. Thus, the Berkeley Library’s efforts to pursue transformative publishing agreements and prioritize funding for a program subsidizing publishing fees seem like effective strategies to increase OA. Introduction In October 2018, the University of California Berkeley (Berkeley) Library invited all Berkeley faculty members to participate in the Ithaka Faculty Survey. Around this time, Berkeley and the rest of the University of California system had announced a “major UC initiative to transform the scholarly publishing industry.” 1 There were numerous communications and conversations regarding scholarly publishing and moving toward Open Access (OA). According to the Faculty Survey, 71% of the faculty respondents at Berkeley, versus 64% nationwide, indicated that they would be happy to see the traditional publication model replaced by an OA publication system. 2 This suggests that UC’s efforts to transform scholarly publishing were aligned with the views of Berkeley faculty. As part of an ARL Impact Pilot on the topic of “(how) does the library help to increase research productivity and impact?,” we decided to investigate the OA productivity of Berkeley faculty and compare faculty’s views on OA and scholarly publishing, expressed in the Faculty Survey, to their actual publishing practices. Accordingly, this paper begins with a summary of the Faculty Survey results that pertain to faculty views on OA, which provides a background for our current study. Our study then includes (1) analysis of the survey respondents’ 2016–2019 publication output, including OA publications; and (2) analysis of a de-identified dataset that links survey responses with respondents’ publication data. The results of our study provide insights into faculty’s attitudes around OA publishing, including the role funding availability and discipline play in faculty’s OA publishing. Having greater knowledge of the OA 1 publishing landscape at Berkeley provides benchmarks that can be used in future analyses, like ones looking at the impact of new transformative publishing agreements. Additionally, this study gives us insight into how the library can better support OA publishing. Background—2018 Ithaka Faculty Survey The Berkeley Library partnered with national research organization Ithaka S+R to launch a survey of Berkeley faculty in October 2018. The survey was sent to 2,748 Berkeley faculty members. There were 41 questions, including a number of questions on research dissemination and publication, and 811 faculty responded, which was a 30% response rate. In order to understand faculty’s perception of OA, we considered faculty’s answers to specific questions about research dissemination and publication. One of the questions was about the factors that influence faculty’s decisions about the journals where they publish their articles. Six hundred seventy-six responses were analyzed for this question. The top two (91%) influencing factors were (1) the journal is widely distributed, and (2) the journal has a high impact factor or an excellent academic reputation, while the third choice (84%) was that the coverage area of the journal is close to the faculty’s immediate area of research. In contrast, OA factors were ranked lower; 41% of the faculty respondents (compared with 38% nationally) indicated that a journal having no cost to read was very important, while 59% (compared with 70% nationally) indicated that a journal having no cost to publish was very important. To look at disciplinary differences, we used four broad subject categories based on the faculty’s department: Life and Health Sciences (LHS), Engineering and Physical Sciences (EPS), Social Sciences (SS), and Arts and Humanities (AH). Analyzing the two OA factors by subject groups, it is noticeable that a higher percentage of the faculty in AH value no cost to publish, while a higher percentage of the faculty in LHS value no cost to read (Figure 1). Figure 1. Research funding is relevant to a discussion about OA, since some OA publishing channels require costly publishing fees. In another question, faculty were asked if they received external funding for their scholarly research from a public or government grant-making organization (such as the NSF, NIH, NEH, 2 etc.) in the last five years. A greater percentage of Berkeley faculty overall (54%) reported having received or currently receiving external funding compared to their peers nationally (35%). There were strong disciplinary differences—86% of the faculty in both LHS and EPS, versus 45% in SS, and only 22% in AH received funding in the last five years. The importance of the cost to publish seems to vary based on if the faculty received The uneven distribution of authors and, especially, articles means it is harder to generalize about Berkeley authors overall based on our results. Another limitation is that Berkeley authors were not necessarily first/corresponding authors, so 15 they may not have made the decision on where to publish, directly received the funding associated with the article, or been responsible for the article’s APC. A Scopus search for articles and reviews from 2016–2019 with authors affiliated with Berkeley finds that 19% of the publications are Gold OA, which is comparable to the 18% Gold OA articles we found. Thus, this study’s sample may at least be representative of Berkeley authors in Scopus overall. Another limitation is that looking only at Gold OA articles does not show all of the authors' deliberate actions to make their articles available. For example, we were unable to separate out Hybrid articles for which authors paid an APC to make the article immediately OA. Those articles represent a portion, but not all, of Unpaywall’s Hybrid category. Also, articles that were immediately deposited in a repository, showing OA intention, would have been lumped together in Unpaywall’s Green category with articles that became available after an embargo period. Unpaywall also does not capture articles that authors make available via independent sites like Academic Social Networks. Another caveat concerning Unpaywall is that Akbaritabar and Stahlschmidt, and Piwowar and colleagues, found some discrepancies between Unpaywall data and the actual availability of article pdfs at publisher sites, with the latter study reporting that Unpaywall’s data tended to underestimate actual OA levels. 25 Thus, Unpaywall data may not be a perfect representation of an article’s availability OA, and, for categories other than Gold, may just provide a snapshot of availability as licenses and embargos change. UC Berkeley faculty have high rates of Open Access publishing University of California adopted a Presidential Open Access Policy in 2015 26 that requires UC faculty and other employees to make their research publicly available, which can be accomplished by publishing OA and/or by depositing a copy of their scholarly articles in an OA repository. The OA policy and funder mandates undoubtedly have a direct influence on Berkeley faculty’s high rate of Green OA, and both likely influence Gold OA publishing as well. The overall levels of OA found in the study, 72%, were higher than the range (29% - 66%) reported in the review of studies that calculated overall OA levels for articles 2010 and newer. 27 Since there are many methods of calculating OA, it seems appropriate to compare our study to other studies that also used Unpaywall (also called oaDOI) to determine an article’s OA status. Piwowar and colleagues looked at a random sample of 100,000 articles accessed by users of the Unpaywall browser extension in 2017 and found 47% of the articles to be OA, with 14% Gold OA. 28 Olejniczak and Wilson used Unpaywall data to look at articles from 2014-2018 authored by 182,320 faculty at research institutions, identifying faculty and articles using the Academic Analytics database; they reported an overall OA percent of 46%, with 12% Gold OA. 29 Bosman and Kramer used data behind Unpaywall to look at more than 12 million articles and reviews published 2010-2017 that were indexed in Web of Science. They found that OA levels increased from 2010 to 2016, with an overall OA percentage of nearly 30% in 2015 and 2016. 30 The aforementioned three studies looked at much larger sets of articles that were derived using different methods. These studies did not use Scopus, so the distribution of disciplines represented by the articles in these studies may have differed from ours, which was heavily biased toward the sciences. Nevertheless, it appears that Berkeley authors have an above-average rate of OA publishing, both overall (72%) and Gold OA (18%). 16 UC Berkeley faculty show strong support for Open Access Not only is an above-average proportion of Berkeley-authored articles OA, the Ithaka Faculty Survey indicated that Berkeley faculty’s support of OA is also above average (41% rated no cost to read very important, compared to 38% nationally). Although making articles free to read was not the journal characteristic that faculty rated most highly, the average importance for the 479 faculty in our study was 6.5 out of 10, which still indicates support for OA. Additionally, the top publishing characteristic for Berkeley authors in the Faculty Survey was that a journal is circulated widely and is “well-read by scholars in your field;” 31 wide circulation is of course a benefit of a journal being free to read, though researchers may not always make that connection. Our study found that faculty who publish more Gold OA feel more strongly about articles having no cost to read. These authors may have experienced individual benefits of OA publishing, such as their articles having been read and cited more, or may feel a personal conviction that research should be openly available, or both. This agrees with other studies that found a positive relationship between OA publishing and pro-OA attitudes. 32 These studies also found that peers influence authors to publish OA, so this positive relationship could lead to even more OA publishing at Berkeley. Concerns about publishing costs and the role of research funding Our results showed that faculty whose articles reported research funding published more Gold OA. Olejniczak and Wilson found that researchers with grant funding were more likely to publish OA (both total OA, and Gold + Hybrid). 33 Of the nearly 5,000 SOAP survey respondents who indicated a reason for not publishing OA, lack of funding for APCs was given as the most common reason for researchers in most disciplines. 34 Weckowska and colleagues found that even bioscience researchers with pro-OA attitudes reported feeling inhibited in their OA publishing by expensive APCs. 35 The Ithaka Faculty Survey showed that Berkeley faculty, on average, are less concerned about paying APCs compared to their peers nationally (59% rated no cost to publish very important, compared to 70% nationally). The higher level of